Add a blog on how to bootstrap an air-gapped cluster using kubeadm (#42726)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-09-15-Bootstrap-an-Air-Gapped-Cluster-with-Kubeadm/index.md

Reviewer: Please rename `content/en/blog/_posts/2023-09-15-Bootstrap-an-Air-Gapped-Cluster-with-Kubeadm/index.md` to be all-lowercase; that's more common.

Author: @sftim , this is done.

Reviewer: Please switch all first-level headings to be second level headings. We also usually use sentence case.

Example:
```diff
-# The Air Gap VM Setup
+## The air-gapped VM: setup
```

Author: @sftim , this is done.

---
layout: blog
title: "Bootstrap an Air Gapped Cluster With Kubeadm"
date: 2023-09-15
slug: bootstrap-an-air-gapped-cluster-with-kubeadm
---

**Author:** Rob Mengert (Defense Unicorns)

> # Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Don't use a first-level heading. Also, we avoid starting articles with any level of heading.

Ever wonder how software gets deployed onto a system that is deliberately disconnected from the Internet and other networks? These systems are typically disconnected due to their sensitive nature. Sensitive as in utilities (power/water), banking, healthcare, weapons systems, other government use cases, etc. Sometimes it's technically a water gap, if you're running Kubernetes on an underwater vessel. Still, these environments need software to operate. This concept of deployment in a disconnected state is what it means to deploy to the other side of an [air gap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)).

Again, despite this posture, software still needs to run in these environments. Traditionally, software artifacts are physically carried across the air gap on hard drives, USB sticks, CDs, or floppy disks (for ancient systems, it still happens). Kubernetes lends itself particularly well to running software behind an air gap for several reasons, largely due to its declarative nature.

> In this blog article, I will walk through the process of bootstrapping a Kubernetes cluster in an air-gapped environment using Fedora Linux and kubeadm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog article, I will walk through the process of bootstrapping a Kubernetes
cluster in an air-gapped lab environment using Fedora Linux and kubeadm.
```

This sets it up for when you mention ”lab” later.

# The Air Gap VM Setup

A real air-gapped network can take some effort to set up, so for this post, I will use an example VM on a laptop and do some network modifications. Below is the topology:

{{< figure src="airgap-vm.svg" alt="Topology on the host/laptop which shows that connectivity to the internet from the air gap VM is not possible. However, connectivity between the host/laptop and the VM is possible" >}}

> **Local Topology**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Local Topology
```

This VM will have its network connectivity disabled but in a way that doesn't shut down the VM's virtual NIC. Instead, its network will be downed by injecting a default route to a dummy interface, making anything internet-hosted unreachable. However, the VM still has a connected route to the bridge interface on the host, which means that network connectivity to the host is still working. This posture means that data can be transferred from the host/laptop to the VM via scp, even with the default route on the VM black-holing all traffic that isn't destined for the local bridge subnet. This type of transfer is analogous to carrying data across the air gap and will be used throughout this post.

Other details about the lab setup:

**VM OS:** Fedora 37

**Kubernetes Version:** v1.27.3

**CNI Plugins Version:** v1.3.0

**CNI Provider and Version:** Flannel v0.22.0

# Identifying the required software artifacts

> We have gone through the trouble of identifying all of the required software components that need to be carried across the air gap in order for this cluster to be stood up:

Reviewer: ````suggestion
I have gone through the trouble of identifying all of the required software components that need to be carried across the air gap in order for this cluster to be stood up:
```

- Docker (to host an internal container image registry)
- Containerd
- libcgroup
- socat
- conntrack-tools
- CNI plugins

> - critctl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- crictl
```

- kubelet
- kubectl and k9s (strictly speaking, these aren't required to bootstrap a cluster but they are handy to interact with one)
- service systemd file
- kubeadm configuration file
- Docker registry container image
- Kubernetes component container images
- CNI network plugin container images ([Flannel](https://github.com/flannel-io/flannel) will be used for this lab)
- CNI network plugin manifests
- CNI tooling container images

The way I identified these was by trying to do the installation and working through all of the errors that are thrown around an additional dependency being required. In a real air-gapped scenario, each transport of artifacts across the air gap could represent anywhere from 20 minutes to several weeks of time spent by the installer. That is to say that the target system could be located in a data center on the same floor as your desk, at a satellite downlink facility in the middle of nowhere, or on a submarine that's out to sea. Knowing what is on that system at any given time is important so you know what you have to bring.

# Prepare the Node for K8s

Before downloading and moving the artifacts to the VM, let's first prep that VM to run Kubernetes.

> ### As a normal user:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### VM preparation

_Run these steps as a normal user_
```

**Make destination directory for software artifacts**

```bash
mkdir ~/tmp
```

> ### As root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Run the following steps as the superuser_ (`root`)
```

> **Write to /etc/sysctl.d/99-k8s-cri.conf**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write to `/etc/sysctl.d/99-k8s-cri.conf`:
```

```bash
cat > /etc/sysctl.d/99-k8s-cri.conf << EOF
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables=1
net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables=1
EOF
```

> **Write to /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write to `/etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf` (enable `overlay` and `nbr_netfilter`):
```

```bash
echo -e overlay\\nbr_netfilter > /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
```

> **Install iptables-legacy**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install iptables:
```

```bash
dnf -y install iptables-legacy
```

> **Set iptables to use iptables-legacy**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set iptables to use legacy mode (not `nft` emulating `iptables`):
```

```bash
update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy
```

> **Turn off swap**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Turn off swap:
```

```bash
touch /etc/systemd/zram-generator.conf
systemctl mask systemd-zram-setup@.service
sed -i '/ swap / s/^\(.*\)$/#\1/g' /etc/fstab
```

> **Disable firewalld**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disable `firewalld` (this is OK in a demo context):
```

```bash
systemctl disable --now firewalld
```

> **Disable systemd-resolved**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Disable `systemd-resolved`:
```

```bash
systemctl disable --now systemd-resolved
```

> **Configure DNS defaults for NetworkManager**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Configure DNS defaults for NetworkManager:
```

```bash
sed -i '/\[main\]/a dns=default' /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf
```

> **Blank the system-level DNS resolver configuration**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Blank the system-level DNS resolver configuration:
```

```bash
unlink /etc/resolv.conf || true
touch /etc/resolv.conf
```

> **Disable SELinux (just for a demo - check before doing this in production!)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disable SELinux _(just for a demo - check before doing this in production!)_:
```

```bash
setenforce 0
```

**Make sure all changes survive a reboot**
```bash
reboot
```
# Download all the artifacts

> On the laptop/host machine, download all of the artifacts enumerated in the previous section.  Since the air gapped VM is running Fedora 37, all of the dependencies shown in this part are for Fedora 37.  Note, this procedure will only work on AArch64 or AMD64 CPU architectures.  Execute this procedure anywhere where you have write permission, your home directory is perfectly suitable.

Reviewer 2: This sentence`Execute this procedure anywhere where you have write permission, your home directory is perfectly suitable.` can be changed to 
`You can execute this procedure anywhere you have write permissions; your home directory is a perfectly suitable choice.`
This looks more user friendly.

Author: @Vikash-8090-Yadav , agreed. Your suggestion reads a lot friendlier.  Thanks!

> Note, operating system packages for the Kubernetes artifacts that need to be carried across can now be found at [pkgs.k8s.io](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/08/15/pkgs-k8s-io-introduction/). This blog post will use a combination of Fedora repositories and GitHub in order to download all of the required artifacts. When you’re doing this on your own cluster, you should pick whether to use the official Kubernetes packages, or the official packages from your operating system distribution - both are valid choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, operating system packages for the Kubernetes artifacts that need to be carried across
can now be found at [pkgs.k8s.io](/blog/2023/08/15/pkgs-k8s-io-introduction/).
This blog post will use a combination of Fedora repositories and GitHub in order to download
all of the required artifacts. When you’re doing this on your own cluster, you should pick
whether to use the official Kubernetes packages, or the official packages from your operating
system distribution - both are valid choices.
```

Reviewer 2: Instead of `pick` I recommend using `decide` as this makes more user-friendly and sensible.

Reviewer: For _docs_ I'd agree @Vikash-8090-Yadav. However this is a blog article and it's OK for @TheFutonEng to write in his authentic own choice of words.

@TheFutonEng: your call, on this one.

Author: Went with 'decide,' thanks for the suggestions @Vikash-8090-Yadav .

> 

Reviewer: Please explain that this article only covers AArch64 and AMD64 (eg: because those are the two most popular ones). Otherwise you are leaving readers to guess.

Author: @sftim , this is done.

```bash
# Set architecture variables
UARCH=$(uname -m)

if [["$UARCH" == "arm64" || "$UARCH" == "aarch64"]]; then

    ARCH="aarch64"
    K8s_ARCH="arm64"

else

    ARCH="x86_64"
    K8s_ARCH="amd64"

fi
```

> **Export environment variables for release versions**

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
Set environment variables for software versions to use:
```

These variables are not being marked for export (and they don't need to be).

    "registry.k8s.io/kube-proxy:${KUBE_RELEASE}"
    "registry.k8s.io/pause:3.9"
    "registry.k8s.io/etcd:3.5.7-0"
    "registry.k8s.io/coredns/coredns:v1.10.1"
    "registry:2.8.2"
    "flannel/flannel:v0.22.0"
    "flannel/flannel-cni-plugin:v1.1.2"
)

for image in "${images[@]}"; do
    # Pull the image from the registry
    docker pull "$image"

    # Save the image to a tar file on the local disk
    image_name=$(echo "$image" | sed 's|/|_|g' | sed 's/:/_/g')
    docker save -o "${image_name}.tar" "$image"

done
```

The above commands will take a look at the CPU architecture for the current host/laptop, create and change into a directory called download, and finally download all of the dependencies. Each of these files must then be transported over the air gap via scp. The exact syntax of the command will vary depending on the user on the VM, if you created an SSH key, and the IP of your air gap VM. The rough syntax is:
```bash
scp -i <<SSH_KEY>> <<FILE>> <<AIRGAP_VM_USER>>@<<AIRGAP_VM_IP>>:~/tmp/
```
Once all of the files have been transported to the air gapped VM, the rest of the blog post will take place from the VM. Open a terminal session to that system.

> **Put the artifacts in place**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Put the artifacts in place
```

Everything that is needed in order to bootstrap a Kubernetes cluster now exists on the air-gapped VM. This section is a lot more complicated since various types of artifacts are now on disk on the air-gapped VM. Get a root shell on the air gap VM as the rest of this section will be executed from there. Let's start by setting the same architecture variables and environmental as were set on the host/laptop and then install all of the RPM packages:

```bash
UARCH=$(uname -m)
# Set architecture variables

if [["$UARCH" == "arm64" || "$UARCH" == "aarch64"]]; then

    ARCH="aarch64"
    K8s_ARCH="arm64"

else

    ARCH="x86_64"
    K8s_ARCH="amd64"

fi

> # Set environmental vartiables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set environment variables
```

CNI_PLUGINS_VERSION="v1.3.0"
CRICTL_VERSION="v1.27.0"
KUBE_RELEASE="v1.27.3"
RELEASE_VERSION="v0.15.1"
K9S_VERSION="v0.27.4"

cd ~/tmp/

dnf -y install ./*.rpm
```

> **Next, install the CNI plugins and crictl:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, install the CNI plugins and `crictl`:
```

```bash
mkdir -p /opt/cni/bin
tar -C /opt/cni/bin -xz -f "cni-plugins-linux-${K8s_ARCH}-v1.3.0.tgz"
tar -C /usr/local/bin-xz -f "crictl-v1.27.0-linux-${K8s_ARCH}.tar.gz"
```

> **Make kubeadm, kubelet and kubectl executable and move them from the /tmp directory to /usr/local/bin:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make kubeadm, kubelet and kubectl executable and move them from the `/tmp`
directory to `/usr/local/bin`:
```

```bash
chmod +x kubeadm kubelet kubectl
mv kubeadm kubelet kubectl /usr/local/bin
```

> **Define an override for the systemd kubelet service file and move it to the proper location.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Define an override for the systemd kubelet service file, and move it to the proper location:
```

```bash
mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/kubelet.service.d

sed "s:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin:g" 10-kubeadm.conf > /etc/systemd/system/kubelet.service.d/10-kubeadm.conf
```

> **The CRI plugin for containerd is disabled by default; enable it:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CRI plugin for containerd is disabled by default; enable it:
```

```bash
sed -i 's/^disabled_plugins = \["cri"\]/#&/' /etc/containerd/config.toml
```

> **Put the /etc/docker/daemon.json file in place:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Put a custom `/etc/docker/daemon.json` file in place:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: Check line endings here.

Author: @sftim , apologies. What line endings should I be looking at here?

echo '{

"exec-opts": ["native.cgroupdriver=systemd"],

"insecure-registries" : ["localhost:5000"],

"allow-nondistributable-artifacts": ["localhost:5000"],

"log-driver": "json-file",

"log-opts": {

"max-size": "100m"

},

"group": "rnd",

"storage-driver": "overlay2",

"storage-opts": [

"overlay2.override_kernel_check=true"

]

}' > /etc/docker/daemon.json
```

> Two important lines to highlight in the daemon.json file. The insecure-registries line means that the registry in brackets does not support TLS. Even inside an air gapped environment, this isn't a good practice but is fine for the purposes of this lab. The allow-nondistributable-artifacts line tells Docker to permit pushing nondistributable artifacts to this registry. Docker by default does not push these layers to avoid potential issues around licensing or distribution rights. A good example of this is the Windows base container image. This line will allow layers that Docker marks as "foreign" to be pushed to the registry. While not a big deal for this article, that line could be required for some air gapped environments. All layers have to exist locally since nothing inside the air gapped environment can reach out to a public container image registry to get what it needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two important items to highlight in the Docker `daemon.json` configuration file.
The `insecure-registries` setting means that the registry in brackets does not support TLS.
Even inside an air gapped environment, this isn't a good practice - but is fine for the purposes
of this article and the lab environment I'm describing.
The `allow-nondistributable-artifacts` line tells Docker to permit pushing nondistributable
artifacts to this registry. Docker by default does not push these layers to avoid potential issues
around licensing or distribution rights. A good example of this is the Windows base container
image. This configuration will allow layers that Docker marks as _foreign_ to be pushed to the
registry on the internal side of the air gap. While not a big deal for this article, that line could
be required for some air gapped environments. All layers have to exist locally since nothing
inside the air gapped environment can reach out to a public container image registry to get
what it needs.
```

Author: @sftim , added this suggestion manually (Github was going to break this chunk up into multiple lines if I committed it directly from the comment 🤷‍♂️ ).

> **Start and enable Docker:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Re)start Docker and enable it so it starts at system boot:
```

```bash
systemctl restart docker
systemctl enable docker
```

> **Start and enable the kubelet:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start, and enable, containerd and the kubelet:
```

```bash

> systemctl start kubelet
> systemctl enable kubelet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
systemctl enable --now containerd
systemctl enable --now kubelet
```

```

The container image registry that runs in Docker is only required for any CNI related containers and subsequent workload containers. This registry is **not** used to house the Kubernetes component containers. Note, nerdctl would have also worked here as an alternative to Docker and would have allowed for direct interaction with containerd. Docker was chosen for its familiarity.

> **Start Docker registry**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start a container image registry inside Docker:
```

```bash
docker load -i registry_2.8.2.tar
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --restart=always --name registry registry:2.8.2
```

> **Load Flannel containers into the Docker registry:**

Reviewer 3: we stopped recommending flannel some time ago, due to sporadic bugs and not keeping up to date with latest k8s.

you can check colium or kindnet for this demo. add note for users to pick their cni.

Reviewer: This isn't the Kubernetes project recommending Flannel; this is @TheFutonEng picking a particular network plugin for a demo / lab.

@TheFutonEng you might like to outline - _briefly_ - how or why you picked this plugin. If the reasoning isn't important, you could make it clear that people reading this are free to pick a different plugin.

Author: @neolit123 , @sftim , thanks for the input.  The reasoning wasn't important behind the choice of Flannel.  I'll add some context here and make it clear that folks should choose the CNI that works best for their environment.

```bash
docker load -i flannel_flannel_v0.22.0.tar
docker load -i flannel_flannel-cni-plugin_v1.1.2.tar
docker tag flannel/flannel:v0.22.0 localhost:5000/flannel/flannel:v0.22.0
docker tag flannel/flannel-cni-plugin:v1.1.1 localhost:5000/flannel/flannel-cni-plugin:v1.1.1
docker push localhost:5000/flannel/flannel:v0.22.0
docker push localhost:5000/flannel/flannel-cni-plugin:v1.1.1
```

> Load container images for Kubernetes components, via ctr:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load container images for Kubernetes components, via `ctr`:
```

```bash
images_files=(
    "registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver:${KUBE_RELEASE}"
    "registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager:${KUBE_RELEASE}"
    "registry.k8s.io/kube-scheduler:${KUBE_RELEASE}"
    "registry.k8s.io/kube-proxy:${KUBE_RELEASE}"
    "registry.k8s.io/pause:3.9"
    "registry.k8s.io/etcd:3.5.7-0"
    "registry.k8s.io/coredns/coredns:v1.10.1"
    
)

for index in "${!image_files[@]}"; do

    if [[-f "${image_files[$index]}" ]]; then

        # The below line loads the images where they need to be on the VM
        ctr -n k8s.io images import ${image_files[$index]}

    else

>         echo "File ${image_files[$index]} not found!"

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
        echo "File ${image_files[$index]} not found!" 1>&2
```
(write errors to STDERR)

    fi

done
```

> A totally reasonable question here could be "Why not use the Docker registry that was just stood up to house the K8s component images?" This simply didn't work even with the proper modification to the configuration file that gets passed to kubeadm.

Reviewer 3: this doesn't sound right. FYI we run an air gapped kubeadm in our ci and we only preload all required images with ctr.

there is no local docker registry at all.

Reviewer: There is in this lab @neolit123

_per_
> ```markdown
> The container image registry that runs in Docker is only required for any CNI related
> containers and subsequent workload containers. This registry is **not** used to house
> the Kubernetes component containers. Note, nerdctl would have also worked here as an
> alternative to Docker and would have allowed for direct interaction with containerd.
> Docker was chosen for its familiarity.
> ```

@TheFutonEng **optional**, but might well help readers: add a second diagram, showing a real world layout that the lab approximates.

This might be: 
- three control plane computers
- _n_ worker node computers
- one container registry computer **(this is where Docker gets used)**
- a workstation for adding artifacts
- a standalone workstation for antimalware scanning _(optional)_

and, on the public side of the air gap:
- a workstation for downloading things and putting them onto a USB thumb drive

Author: @neolit123 , @sftim , thanks again for the input.  Agree that another diagram could be helpful here, showing a possible real-world layout.  I'll compose one and add it to the repo, reusing the same style/color from the first diagram.

Author: @sftim , @neolit123  added a diagram of what an example production environment could look like based on your suggestions.  I placed it right after describing the single VM lab environment that will host the lab.  Open to moving it elsewhere.

> **Spin up the Kubernetes cluster**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Spin up the Kubernetes cluster
```

Check if a cluster is already running and tear it down if it is:

```bash
if systemctl is-active --quiet kubelet; then

    # Reset the Kubernetes cluster

    echo "A Kubernetes cluster is already running. Resetting the cluster..."

    kubeadm reset -f

fi
```

> **Log into the Docker registry from inside the air-gapped VM:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log into the Docker registry from inside the air-gapped VM:
```

```bash
# OK for a demo; use secure credentials in production!

DOCKER_USER=user
DOCKER_PASS=pass
echo ${DOCKER_PASS} | docker login --username=${DOCKER_USER} --password-stdin localhost:5000
```

> **Create a cluster configuration file and initialize the cluster:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a cluster configuration file and initialize the cluster:
```

```bash
echo "---

> apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta3

Reviewer 3: this configuration includes defaults that can confuse the user. better omit them.

clusterName, certificateDir, etcd, ...

Reviewer: Seems OK to leave in `clusterName` - it's a hint to readers that they might want to set something.

Author: I'm happy to remove anything that is a default value.

kind: ClusterConfiguration
clusterName: kubernetes
kubernetesVersion: v1.27.3
certificatesDir: /etc/kubernetes/pki
etcd:
    local:
        dataDir: /var/lib/etcd
networking:
    dnsDomain: cluster.local
    podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16 # --pod-network-cidr
    serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/12
---
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta3
kind: InitConfiguration
localAPIEndpoint:

>     advertiseAddress: 10.10.10.10 # Update to the IP address of the air gap VM

Reviewer 3: it will be autodetected if the vm has a sane default route

Author: @neolit123 , not covered in the post, but to set up the air gap VM, a default route was created to a loopback interface.  I'm happy to supply more context if you think that's needed.

    bindPort: 6443
nodeRegistration:

>     criSocket: unix:///run/containerd/containerd.sock

Reviewer 3: autodetected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    criSocket: unix:///run/containerd/containerd.sock # or rely on autodetection
```

>     name: airgap # this must match the hostname of the air gap VM

Reviewer 3: autodetected

# Since this is a single node cluster, this taint has to be commented out,
# otherwise the coredns pods will not come up.
# taints:
# - effect: NoSchedule
# key: node-role.kubernetes.io/master

> bootstrapTokens:

Reviewer 3: remove bootstrapTokens*

Author: @neolit123 , thanks, this is done.

- groups:
    - system:bootstrappers:kubeadm:default-node-token
    token: abcdef.0123456789abcdef
    ttl: 24h0m0s
    usages:
    - signing
    - authentication" > kubeadm_cluster.yaml

kubeadm init --config kubeadm_config.yaml
```

> **Export the KUBECONFIG and wait until the API server is healthy:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `$KUBECONFIG` and use `kubectl` to wait until the API server is healthy:
```

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf

until kubectl get nodes; do

>     echo -e "\nWaiting for API server to respond..."

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
    echo -e "\nWaiting for API server to respond..." 1>&2
```

    sleep 5

done
```

> **Update Flannel image locations in the Flannel manifest and apply:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up networking

Update Flannel image locations in the Flannel manifest, and apply it:
```

```bash
sed -i 's/image: docker\.io/image: localhost:5000/g' kube-flannel.yaml
kubectl apply -f kube-flannel.yaml
```

Run `kubectl get pods -A --watch` until all pods are up and running.

# Run an example Pod

With a cluster operational, the next step is a workload. For this simple demonstration, the [Podinfo](https://github.com/stefanprodan/podinfo) application will be deployed.

> ## Helm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install Helm
```

```bash
UARCH=$(uname -m)
# Reset the architecture variables if needed
if [["$UARCH" == "arm64" || "$UARCH" == "aarch64"]]; then

    ARCH="aarch64"
    K8s_ARCH="arm64"

else

    ARCH="x86_64"
    K8s_ARCH="amd64"

fi

curl -LO https://get.helm.sh/helm-v3.12.2-linux-${K8s_ARCH}.tar.gz
```

Add the Podinfo helm repository, download the Podinfo helm chart, download the Podinfo container image, and then finally save it to the local disk:

```bash
helm repo add https://stefanprodan.github.io/podinfo
helm fetch podinfo/podinfo --version 6.4.0
docker pull ghcr.io/stefanprodan/podinfo:6.4.0
```

**Save the image to a tar file on the local disk**
```bash
docker save -o podinfo_podinfo-6.4.0.tar ghcr.io/stefanprodan/podinfo
```
**Reuse the ~/tmp directory created on the air gapped VM to transport these artifacts across the air gap:**
```bash
scp -i <<SSH_KEY>> <<FILE>> <<AIRGAP_VM_USER>>@<<AIRGAP_VM_IP>>:~/tmp/
```
Now pivot over to the air gap VM for the rest of the installation procedure.

Switch into ~/tmp:
```
cd ~/tmp
```
Extract and move the helm binary:

```
tar -zxvf helm-v3.0.0-linux-amd64.tar.gz
mv linux-amd64/helm /usr/local/bin/helm
```

> **Load the Podinfo container image into the local Docker registry:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load the Podinfo container image into the local Docker registry:
```

```bash
docker load -i podinfo_podinfo-6.4.0.tar
docker tag podinfo/podinfo:6.4.0 localhost:5000/podinfo/podinfo:6.4.0
docker push localhost:5000/podinfo/podinfo:6.4.0
```

> **Ensure the proper KUBECONFIG is set and install the Podinfo helm chart:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure "$KUBECONFIG` is set correctly, then install the Podinfo helm chart:
```

> ```

Reviewer: Mark this as shell?

Author: @sftim , I'll go back through and update all pertinent code blocks to be bash/shell/yaml/etc as appropriate.

> export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf

Reviewer: I'd add something like:
```suggestion
# Outside of a demo or lab environment, use lower (or even least) privilege
# credentials to manage your workloads.
export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf
```

```
Zarf needs to bootstrap itself into a Kubernetes cluster through the use of an init package. That also needs to be transported across the air gap so let's download it onto the host/laptop:
```bash 
curl -LO "https://github.com/defenseunicorns/zarf/releases/download/${ZARF_VERSION}/zarf-init-${K8s_ARCH}-${ZARF_VERSION}.tar.zst"
```
The way that Zarf is declarative is through the use of a zarf.yaml file. Here is the zarf.yaml file that will be used for this Podinfo installation. Write it to whatever directory you you have write access to on your host/laptop; your home directory is fine:
```
echo "kind: ZarfPackageConfig
metadata:
    name: podinfo
    description: "Deploy helm chart for the podinfo application in K8s via zarf"
components:
    - name: podinfo
        required: true
        charts:
            - name: podinfo
              version: 6.4.0
              namespace: podinfo-helm-namespace
              releaseName: podinfo
              url: https://stefanprodan.github.io/podinfo
        images:
        - ghcr.io/stefanprodan/podinfo:6.4.0" > zarf.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: This quoting looks wrong. Use single quotes for the outer ones **or** use a multiline YAML string for the description.

Author: Yup, whoops.  I'll do single quotes for the outer ones.

The next step is to build the Podinfo package. This must be done from the same directory location where the zarf.yaml file is located.
```bash
zarf package create --confirm
```
This command will download the defined helm chart and image and put them into a single file written to disk. This single file is all that needs to be carried across the air gap:

```bash
$ ls zarf-package-*

> zarf-package-podinfo-arm64.tar.zst

Reviewer: Not a valid shell script - remove the prompt and put the sample output in its own block?

Author: 👍 , done.

```
Transport the linux zarf binary, zarf init package and Podinfo package over to the air gapped VM:

```bash
scp -i <<SSH_KEY>> <<FILE>> <<AIRGAP_VM_USER>>@<<AIRGAP_VM_IP>>:~/tmp/
```

From the air gapped VM, switch into the ~/tmp directory where all of the artifacts were placed:
```bash
cd ~/tmp
```

> Export the KUBECONFIG for the local cluster and the Zarf version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `$KUBECONFIG` to a file with credentials for the local cluster; also set the the Zarf version:
```

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf

export ZARF_VERSION=$(zarf version)
```

> As root, make the zarf binary executable and move it to /usr/bin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the `zarf` binary executable and (as `root`) move it to `/usr/bin`:
```

```bash
chmod +x zarf && sudo mv zarf /usr/bin
```

> Likewise, move the init package to /usr/bin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Likewise, move the Zarf init package to `/usr/bin`:
```

```bash
mv zarf-init-arm64-${ZARF_VERSION}.tar.zst /usr/bin
```

> Initialize zarf into the cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Initialize Zarf into the cluster:
```
